http://www.dmv.ca.gov/online/elp/elp.htm


                    Welcome to California California Home


   Welcome to California, picture montage consisting of California grapes,
   cable car, PDA, San Diego skyline, Hollywood sign, and Monterey cypress
   tree.




                   DMV Home Page
                   Online Services
                   DMV Locations & Hours
                   Publications
                   Forms
                   New Arrivals

                     New to California?

                     FAQs

                     Site Map
                   Title & Registration Information

                     Vehicle Registration

                     Boat Registration

                   License and ID Card Information

                     Driver License

                     ID Cards

                     Commercial License

                     Vehicle Industry & Commercial Permits
                   Special Plates

                     Personalized Plates

                     Disabled Placards
                   Other Information

     Your DMV Records

     Other Services

     About DMV

     Contact Us

     Legal Notice and Disclaimer


                                [dmvlogo.gif]



   Department of Motor Vehicles



   __________ [BUTTON Input] (not implemented)______
   (*)  My CA   ( )   This Site


   California Special Interest License Plates


Search the Environmental License Plates (ELP) Database to see if the
configuration you want is available.

Check out Personalized and Special Plate for information, fees and the
application form.
  __________________________________________________________________

                   Graphic of the Arts License Plate

The California Arts License Plate supports the California Arts Council
for arts education and local arts programming. The Arts License Plate
Logo is copyrighted by Wayne Thiebaud, noted California artist, and
licensed to the California Arts Council.

For additional information and an application, navigate to the
California Arts Council web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

                           [whaletailT.jpg]

The proceeds from the sales and renewal of the Coastal License Plate
help protect and restore the priceless resources of California's coast
and ocean. The plate was designed by prominent environmental artist
Wyland.

For more information and an application, navigate to the Coastal Fund
web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

                Graphic of the Lake Tahoe License Plate

The proceeds from the sales and renewal of the Lake Tahoe License
Plates are deposited in the Tahoe Conservancy Account for preservation
and restoration projects in the Lake Tahoe area.

For more information and an application, navigate to the Lake Tahoe
Fund web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

                 Graphic of the Yosemite License Plate

The proceeds from the sales and renewal of the Yosemite License Plates
benefit Yosemite National Park and help towards managing wildlife,
restoring habitat, repairing trails and other park projects.

For more information and an application, navigate to Yosemite Fund web
site.
  __________________________________________________________________

               Graphic of the Firefighters License Plate

Proceeds from the sale and renewal of the California Firefighter Plate
are deposited in the California Firefighters' Memorial fund. The
California Firefighter License Plate can be issued to any currently
registered vehicle owned by a California active or retired firefighter.

For more information and an application, navigate to the California
Professional Firefighters' web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

                   Graphic of the Kids License Plate

Proceeds from the sales and renewal of the Kids License Plate are
deposited in the Child Health and Safety Fund to assist in child care
licensing and safety reforms.
  __________________________________________________________________

                 Graphic of the Veterans License Plate

The purchase of the Veteran License Plate benefits participating county
veterans service offices and commemorates veterans organizations.

For more information and an application, navigate to the California
Department of Veterans Affairs web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

 Organizations for the Rotary, Breast Cancer Treatment and Girl Scouts
 are participating in the Special Interest License Plate Program. They
are currently collecting and holding applications until the minimum of
  7,500 applications are received. Once the minimum is met, DMV will
    start issuing the special plates. If 7,500 applications are not
    received, all fees will be returned by mail to the purchasers.
                                   __________________________________________________________________

                     Graphic of the Rotary License Plate

   Proceeds from the sale of these plates will benefit educational and
   community outreach activities supported by Rotary International. The
   plate contains the words "Service Above Self" and the emblem of Rotary
   International.

   For more information and an application, navigate to the Rotary
   International web site.
  __________________________________________________________________

              Graphic of the Breast Cancer License Plate

The new Breast Cancer Treatment License plate will fund life-saving
treatment and give hope to thousands of uninsured and underinsured
women and men with the disease in California. The plate depicts the
pink ribbon and postage stamp that together symbolize hope for
treatment and a cure.

For more information and an application, navigate to the Cure Breast
Cancer web site or phone 1-877-834-4673.
  __________________________________________________________________

              Graphic of the Breast Cancer License Plate

The proceeds from the sale and renewal of the Girl Scout License Plate
will fund outreach efforts in under served areas, camping, field trips,
wider opportunities for older girls, mentoring programs, volunteer
training and other Girl Scout opportunities. The plate displays the
Girl Scout logo.

For more information and an application, navigate to the Girl Scout
Councils of California web site or phone 1-866-4-A-SCOUT (427-2688).
  __________________________________________________________________

    The California Resources Agency Environmental License Plates web
  site provides a "Search the ELP Database" page that was developed by
    the California Environmental Resources Evaluation System (CERES)
                    with assistance from DMV staff.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             Back to Top of Page
    © 2000 State of California. Gray Davis, Governor. Conditions of Use
                               Privacy Policy
        © Copyright 2001 by California Department of Motor Vehicles
