http://minneapolis.fbi.gov/contact/fo/minn/pine_ridge_report.htm

   FBI Seal - Link to FBI Home Page

                              Pine Ridge Report

   Click Seal above to
   go to FBI Home Page
   ... ...


   FBI Minneapolis

                       ....

                              COMMUNITY OUTREACH

   EMPLOYMENT

   FOIPA REQUESTS

     HISTORY

    HOME

   HOW TO CONTACT US

    LINKS

    INVESTIGATIVE PROGRAMS

    LEONARD PELTIER CASE

    MINNEAPOLIS MOST WANTED

    PINE RIDGE REPORT

    TERRITORY

   VICTIM WITNESS








                  Accounting For Native American Deaths
               Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, South Dakota
   Report of the Federal Bureau of Investigation Minneapolis Division
                                May 2000

   The Federal Bureau of Investigation and its Agents in South Dakota can only
operate effectively where we have the trust and help of the American people.
For South Dakota, much of our work revolves around crimes occurring in Indian
Country. The trust and help of reservation residents are vital to the
accomplishment of our sworn duty.

For many years, rumors of unresolved murders of Native Americans have come to
our attention. At times, these allegations represented that there were
hundreds of murdered Native Americans that had not been investigated by the
FBI. The names of murder victims were not attached to the rumors and
addressing the allegations could not be accomplished.

In December of 1999, the South Dakota Advisory Committee of the United States
Commission on Civil Rights (Commission) held a community forum in Rapid City,
South Dakota to discuss the criminal justice system and how it impacts Native
Americans. These allegations were proffered during the hearings and the
Commission was sufficiently impressed by them to incorporate the allegation
in its findings. (See Native Americans in South Dakota: An Erosion of
Confidence in the Justice System, March 2000; p. 38)

Shortly after the forum, the FBI received a list of fifty-seven names with
allegations that their deaths had not been investigated. This list came from
a number of media outlets and for the first time, provided the FBI with
specific information to address. We reviewed our records of these deaths and
found that most had been solved either through conviction or finding that the
death had not been a murder according to the law. The remaining unresolved
murders were known to the FBI and remain under investigation.

The following pages include the allegation and the results of our
investigations. The names of unindicted suspects and some other identifying
information must be excluded to protect privacy interests. It is hoped the
dissemination of this information will clear up allegations of unresolved
murders and protect the confidence the FBI must have to accomplish its
mission.

Douglas J. Domin
Special Agent in Charge
Minneapolis Division

                                     ...

                                     ...

   .

   Leon L. Swift Bird

   Allegation:

   AIM member killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs ["Guardians of the Oglala Nation"].

   Investigation "ongoing."

   Finding:

   On 01/05/75, Leon L. Swift Bird was killed near Pine Ridge, SD, by Dorothy
   Iris Poor Bear. Poor Bear stabbed Swift Bird to death with a knife. On
   09/15/75, Dorothy Iris Poor Bear appeared in U.S. District Court, Rapid City,
   South Dakota, and entered a guilty plea to an indictment which charged her
   with Voluntary Manslaughter in violation of Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections
   1153 and 1112. On the same date, Poor Bear was sentenced to the custody of
   the Attorney General for a period of three years. Execution of the prison
   sentence was suspended, and Poor Bear was placed on probation.

                                 Go to top of page

   Lydla Cut Grass

Allegation:

AIM member killed at Wounded Knee by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 01/05/76, Lydla Cut Grass died at a residence in Wounded Knee, SD. Initial
information suggested that Cut Grass may have died as a result of a beating
that took place three weeks prior to her death. An autopsy determined her
death was not linked to the prior beating, but was a result of over
consumption of liquor.

                              Go to top of page

Edward Means, Jr.



Allegation:

AIM member found dead in Pine Ridge alley, beaten.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 01/07/74, Edward Means, Jr. was found dead in an alley behind the Wesleyan
Lakota Mission, Pine Ridge, South Dakota. The autopsy determined the cause of
death to be hypothermia related to acute alcoholic intoxication.

                              Go to top of page

Byron DeSersa

Allegation:

OSCRO organizer and AIM supporter assassinated by GOONs in Wanblee. Arrests
by local authorities resulted in two GOONs - Dale Janis and Charlie Winters,
serving two years of five year sentences for "manslaughter." Charges dropped
against two GOON leaders, Manny Wilson and Chuck Richards, on the basis of
"self-defense" despite DeSersa having been unarmed when shot to death.

Finding:

Byron De Sersa was shot and killed 01/31/76 while driving his motor vehicle
on the outskirts of Wanblee, SD. The defendants were acquitted by a jury on
03/2/77. Codefendant Charles David Winters pleaded guilty to being an
accessory after the fact to second degree murder and was sentenced to 5 years
in prison. A juvenile defendant was tried on second degree murder charges and
found guilty by a federal jury and was sentenced 05/16/77, under the Federal
Youth Corrections Act, 18 U.S.C. 4219.

                              Go to top of page

Anna Mae Pictou Aquash



Allegation:

AIM organizer assassinated on Pine Ridge.

FBI involved in attempt to conceal cause of death. Ongoing attempt to
establish "AIM involvement" in murder. Key FBI personnel never deposed.
Coroner never deposed.

Finding:

In September, 1976, Anna Mae Pictou Aquash's partially decomposed body was
discovered in a remote area in the northeastern part of the Pine Ridge Indian
Reservation, South Dakota. Cause of death was determined to be a gunshot
wound to the head. The Aquash murder has been linked by media reports to the
RESMURS investigation. In June, 1975, FBI SAs Jack Coler and Ron Williams
were ambushed and killed execution-style on Pine Ridge. The ensuing major
case investigation, RESMURS, resulted in the trial and conviction of Leonard
Peltier, and the trial and acquittal of two other individuals. Some attention
had been focused on Aquash for her possible knowledge of the slayings. Rumors
circulated that Aquash cooperated with the government and was an FBI
informant. These rumors were untrue. The coroner, who died shortly after
performing the autopsy on Aquash, was not deposed. The Aquash murder has not
been solved.

                              Go to top of page

Lena R. Slow Bear



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Oglala by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 02/06/76, Lena R. Slow Bear was found dead beside a road near Pine Ridge,
South Dakota. The autopsy determined that death was caused by alcohol
intoxication and exposure.

                              Go to top of page

Edward Standing Soldier



Allegation:

AIM member killed near Pine Ridge by "party or parties unknown."

No investigation.

Finding:

On 02/18/74, Edward Joseph Standing Soldier died of a gunshot wound to the
abdomen. Investigation by the FBI revealed Standing Soldier died of a .22
caliber gunshot wound fired by Gerald Janis.

Investigation revealed that three juvenile subjects, including Standing
Soldier, were involved in an armed robbery in Janis' residence at Pine Ridge,
South Dakota. Janis shot Standing Soldier with a .22 caliber rifle as a
result of this armed robbery. The matter was presented to a U.S. Grand Jury
on 2/22/74, and a no bill was returned resulting in no prosecution and the
FBI investigation being closed.

                              Go to top of page

Martin Montileaux



Allegation:

Killed in a Scenic, South Dakota, bar. AIM leader Richard Marshall later
framed for his murder. Russell Means also charged and acquitted.

Finding:

On 03/07/75, Martin Montileaux died after being shot in the neck in a bar in
Scenic, South Dakota. Montileaux's dying declaration was "Russell Means'
friend" was the person who shot him. Russell Means and Richard Marshall were
arrested by the Pennington County Sheriff's Office for the shooting of
Montileaux. Scenic, South Dakota, is approximately 20 miles north of the Pine
Ridge Indian Reservation border. The FBI had no investigative jurisdiction in
this matter.

                              Go to top of page

Hobart Horse



Allegation:

AIM member beaten, shot and repeatedly run over with automobile at Sharp's
Corners. No Investigation.

Finding:

Hobart Kenneth Horse died on 03/27/77 from multiple gunshot wounds. Roger
James Cline was charged with the death on 03/28/77, and found guilty of
voluntary manslaughter on 09/08/77. Cline was sentenced to 10 years.

                              Go to top of page

Stacy Cotter



Allegation:

Shot to death in an ambush at Manderson.

No investigation.

Finding:

Stacy Cotter, true name Stacy G. Cortier, aka Stacy G. Cottier, was found
03/21/75 in Manderson, SD with numerous bullet wounds. Cortier was shot
sometime during the evening or early morning of 03/20-21/75. Investigation
revealed that after apparent arguments and a car being shot up, Jerry Bear
Shield may have been shot in the neck by Cortier and Bear Shield in turn
killed Cortier. Jerry Bear Shield was convicted 10/23/75 upon a plea of
guilty in U.S. District Court, Rapid City, SD to an information charging
violation of 18 USC, Section 1153 and 1112, Voluntary Manslaughter. Bear
Shield was sentenced to one year in custody.

                              Go to top of page

Edith Eagle Hawk    (and her two children)



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed in an automobile accident after being run off the road
by a white vigilante, Albert Coomes. Coomes was also killed in the accident.
GOON Mark Clifford identified as having also been in the Coomes car, escaped.
Investigation closed without questioning Clifford.

Finding:

Edith Eagle Hawk died 03/22/75. She died as a result of a two-car automobile
accident four miles north of Scenic, South Dakota, in Pennington County,
outside the exterior boundaries of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Her
injuries described on her death certificate indicate the immediate cause of
death was a crushed chest.

This matter was not investigated by the FBI because it occurred off the
reservation, outside of federal jurisdiction.

                              Go to top of page

Cleveland Reddest



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Kyle by "person or persons unknown."

No investigation.

Finding:

Cleveland Reddest died 3/26976, as a result of a hit and run accident 18
miles east of Kyle, South Dakota. Evidence points to Reddest lying in the
road before the accident. Two suspects were identified. One of the
individuals acknowledged driving the car. The case was not prosecuted because
there was insufficient evidence of criminal conduct.

                              Go to top of page

Jeanette Bissonette



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed by sniper at Pine Ridge. Unsuccessful attempt to link
AIM members to murder. No other investigation.

Finding:

Jeanette Bissonette died 03/26/75, as a result of being shot about eight
miles north of Pine Ridge, South Dakota, when her car broke down. No positive
information was developed to identify the individual responsible.

                              Go to top of page

Richard Eagle



Allegation:

Grandson of AIM supporter Gladys Bissonette killed while playing with loaded
gun kept in the house as protection from GOON attacks.

Finding:

Richard Eagle died of a gunshot wound to the head which occurred on 03/30/75.
Eagle was shot with a .22 caliber sawed off rifle that he and other children
were handling at a relative's home on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. The
South Dakota U.S. Attorney's Office declined to prosecute the case which
appeared to be accidental.

                              Go to top of page

Hilda R. Good Buffalo



Allegation:

AIM supporter stabbed to death at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

Hilda R. Good Buffalo was found dead 04/04/75, in her home in Pine Ridge. She
had a superficial stab wound on her neck and there had been a small fire in
her home. The autopsy determined the cause of death to be carbon monoxide
poisoning, acute alcoholism and other factors. There was insufficient
evidence of a crime to support filing of criminal charges.

                              Go to top of page

Jancita Eagle Deer



Allegation:

AIM member beaten and run over with automobile. Last seen in the company of
federal agent-provocateur Douglass Durham. No investigation.

Finding:

Jancita Eagle Deer died near Aurora, Nebraska on 04/04/75. She was the victim
of a car/pedestrian accident, and her death was reported as accidental. Since
her death occurred outside the jurisdiction of the FBI, no investigation was
conducted by the FBI. However, a motor vehicle accident report from the State
of Nebraska indicated that Eagle Deer was standing in a lane of traffic at
night and was hit by a driver who did not see her. The driver stopped, called
for an ambulance and police assistance at the time of the accident.

                              Go to top of page

Priscilla White Plume



Allegation:

Aim supporter killed at Manderson by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

Priscilla White Plume was found dead 07/14/73. She was believed to have been
struck and killed in a hit and run accident, near Manderson, South Dakota, by
a vehicle. On 09/28/76, the South Dakota U.S. Attorney's Office declined
prosecution in this matter because there was insufficient evidence to
establish a Federal crime. Further, there was inadequate information to
identify a perpetrator. In view of the declination, no further investigation
was conducted by the FBI.

                              Go to top of page

Frank Clearwater



Allegation:

AIM member killed by heavy machine gun round at Wounded Knee.

No investigation.

Finding:

Frank Clearwater, true name Frank J. Clear, was shot at a road block in
Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in April 1973 during a gunfight which started
when Federal agents were fired upon. They returned fire. Clearwater died in a
hospital on 04/25/73. The facts gathered indicated Clearwater's death was the
result of gunfire received from Federal law enforcement officials after 6-8
individuals began firing at Deputy U.S. Marshals at a road block on 4/13/73.

                              Go to top of page

Roxeine Roark



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Porcupine by "unknown assailants."

Investigation open, still "pending."

Finding:

Roxeine Roark, a teacher at the Porcupine Day School, was shot in stomach
with a .357 magnum pistol at her residence in Porcupine, South Dakota.
Investigation revealed that Roark and a friend were handling the weapon when
it discharged accidentally. Roxeine died enroute to the hospital. No
prosecution was undertaken due to the lack of sufficient evidence of a crime.

                              Go to top of page

Buddy Lamont (True Name Lawrence Dean Lamont)



Allegation:

AIM member hit by M16 fire at Wounded Knee and bled to death while pinned
down by fire. No investigation.

Finding:

Buddy Lamont, aka Lawrence Dean Lamont (TN), was shot and killed 04/27/73
during a gunfight with Federal officers at a roadblock in Wounded Knee. The
facts of the matter, along with the autopsy report, were reviewed by the U.S.
Attorney. No charges were filed.

                              Go to top of page

Betty Jo Dubray



Allegation:

AIM supporter beaten to death at Martin, South Dakota.

No investigation.

Finding:

Betty Jo Dubray died 04/28/76, approximately three miles north of Longvalley,
South Dakota, on Highway 73, in Washabaugh County, as a result of a brain
injury in an automobile/truck accident.

Her death was the result of an automobile/truck accident, and no
investigation was conducted by the FBI.

                              Go to top of page

Marvin Two Two



Allegation:

AIM supporter shot to death at Pine Ridge.

No investigation.

Finding:

Marvin Two Two died in Portland, Oregon on 01/02/93. David Martin Two Two
died 05/06/76. A review of death certificates in all surrounding counties in
South Dakota and Nebraska reflect no record of his death.

The FBI had 27 Agents assigned to Pine Ridge during that time and would have
addressed this case if Two Two had been murdered on Pine Ridge.

                              Go to top of page

Julia Pretty Hips



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by "unknown assailants."

No investigation.

Finding:

Julia Pretty Hips was found 05/09/76, near the public school at Pine Ridge.
An autopsy was performed. The cause of death was attributed to carbon
tetrachloide poisoning which led to pneumonia. No signs of trauma were
observed on her body. Since there was no evidence of a crime, no charges were
filed.

                              Go to top of page

Ben Sitting Up



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Wanblee by "unknown assailants."

No investigation.

Finding:

Ben Sitting Up was killed in May, 1975, by an individual using an axe. A
suspect was identified but was not prosecuted because of impairment caused by
a mental condition.

                              Go to top of page

Sam Afraid of Bear



Allegation:

AIM supporter shot to death at Pine Ridge.

Investigation "ongoing."

Finding:

Sam Afraid of Bear was discovered on the Pine Ridge Reservation on 05/20/76.
He had been beaten to death. Two subjects were identified. Rudolph Running
Shield pled guilty in 07/77. Luke Black Elk, Jr. was found guilty in U.S.
District Court of 2nd Degree Murder and sentenced to serve 15 years on
02/09/78.

                              Go to top of page

Kenneth Little



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

Investigation still "pending."

Finding:

Kenneth Lee Little died on 06/01/75, in Pine Ridge after being struck with a
tire iron by Antoine William Bluebird during a quarrel. Bluebird was found
guilty in U.S. District Court, Rapid City on 10/14/75, and sentenced on
10/14/75, to 7 years; 6 months probation.

                              Go to top of page

Kevin Hill (true name Kenneth Mansfield Hill)

Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Oglala by "party or parties unknown."

Investigation "still open."

Finding:

Kenneth Mansfield Hill, a resident of Los Angeles, was hitchhiking in
Oelrich, SD when picked up by four individuals. He was stabbed 19 times,
presumably for his money, by a 17-year-old Indian youth. The juvenile was
convicted of second degree murder on 10/12/76 in U.S. District Court. He was
sentenced on 01/03/77, to 15 years in prison.

                              Go to top of page

Leah Spotted Elk



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

Leah Spotted Elk was murdered near Wolf Creek, SD on 06/15/75. Her husband,
Kenneth John Returns From Scout, was charged. Subject pled guilty on
10/13/75, to shooting his wife while the two were drinking. He was sentenced
to 2 years with 5 months probation.

                              Go to top of page

Clarence Cross



Allegation:

AIM supporter shot to death in ambush by GOONs. Although assailants were
identified by eyewitnesses, brother Vernal Cross, wounded in ambush, was
briefly charged with crime. No further investigation.

Finding:

This was a color of law-law enforcement brutality case involving two BIA
police officers who allegedly shot victims during an arrest on 07/11/73, near
Batesland, SD. Clarence Cross died and another family member was wounded. The
victim's car was stopped by the subject officers and when victims resisted
arrest they were shot by the officers. Vernal Cross was treated at Gordon, NE
hospital and released. Clarence Cross was shot in the stomach and right thigh
and ultimately died of complications at Fitzsimons Army Medical Center,
Aurora, CO. An autopsy was performed and cause of death was linked to the gun
shot wound to the abdomen. The U.S. Attorney's Office advised that there was
insufficient evidence to charge the officers with a crime.

                              Go to top of page

Joseph Stuntz Killsright
(true name Joseph Bedell Stuntz)



Allegation:

AIM member killed by FBI sniper during Oglala firefight.

No investigation.

Finding:

Joseph Stuntz Killsright, aka Joseph Bedell Stuntz (TN), was shot and killed
06/26/75, during the RESMURS investigation. Stuntz was seen shooting at FBI
SA's Williams and Coler at Jumping Bull Community and his body was
subsequently found alongside the Green house near the edge of the cliff.
Stuntz was apparently shot by a law enforcement officer at the scene. When
the body of Stuntz was found, he was wearing a SWAT fatigue jacket with
"F.B.I." on the back, belonging to SA Coler, that had apparently been taken
from the trunk of SA Coler's vehicle after SA Coler was murdered.

                              Go to top of page

Betty Means



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 07/03/76, Betty Lou Means was found dead along Highway 18 several miles
east of Pine Ridge, South Dakota. She was apparently hit by vehicle.
Investigation reflected that an individual was driving a vehicle which struck
the victim. Investigation also reflected that the passenger, Arlene Good
Voice, grabbed and jerked the steering wheel which caused vehicle to hit Ms.
Means. On 12/02/76, the U.S. Attorney's Office, Sioux Falls, South Dakota,
declined prosecution of the driver. Although he left the scene of an
accident, his actions were not a violation of Federal law. On 07/08/77,
Arlene Good Voice pled guilty to Assault, a violation of Title 18, United
States Code, Sections 1153 and 113(d). She received a sentence of 18 months
probation on 08/22/77, in United States District Court, Rapid City, South
Dakota.

                              Go to top of page

James Briggs Yellow



Allegation:

Heart attack caused by FBI air assault on his home.

No investigation.

Finding:

James Briggs Yellow, true name James Brings Yellow, was in the Pine Ridge
Hospital at least one day prior to his death and may have been in for five
days prior to his death. A review of his death certificate showed that he
died of three causes. The three causes were ascending cholangitis, gram
negative sepsis and resulting shock. Other significant conditions included
pneumonia and lung shock.

                              Go to top of page

Andrew Paul Stewart



Allegation:

Nephew of AIM spiritual leader Leonard Crow Dog, killed by GOONs on Pine
Ridge. No investigation.

Finding:

On 07/26/75, a Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Officer, Rosebud Indian
Reservation, South Dakota advised that Andrew Stewart was dead on arrival at
the Rosebud Public Health Service Hospital. Stewart was shot in the head. On
02/05/76, an Assistant U. S. Attorney at Sioux Falls, South Dakota declined
prosecution. The autopsy report revealed the cause of death was probably a
self-inflicted gunshot wound. No credible information was developed
suggesting that any specific person caused the death.

                              Go to top of page

Julius Bad Heart Bull



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Oglala by "person or persons unknown."

No investigation.

Finding:

Julius Bad Heart Bull was the victim of an assault occurring near Oglala,
South Dakota, on 07/30/73. Witnesses to the incident said Bartholomew Joseph
Long knocked the victim to the ground with his fist, picked up a 2 x 4 board,
approximately three feet long containing several protruding nails, and hit
victim in the head several times. Victim died at Rapid City, South Dakota on
07/31/73. Long was arrested on 08/03/73, and charged with Second Degree
Murder. On 01/11/74, he appeared in United States District Court, Rapid City,
South Dakota and was sentenced to the custody of the Attorney General. On
04/19/74, Long was committed to the custody of the Attorney General for 10
years.

                              Go to top of page

Sandra Wounded Foot

Allegation: AIM supporter killed at Sharp's Corners by "unknown assailants."

No investigation.

Finding:

On 08/16/76, Sandra Ellen Wounded Foot, age 15, was found shot in the head in
a remote area of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Suspect Paul Duane
Herman, Jr., who was a Bureau of Indian Affairs Investigator, was believed
responsible for the murder. The victim was last seen alive with Herman in the
early morning of 08/14/76. On 08/16/78, a Federal Grand Jury for the District
of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, returned a true bill charging
Paul Duane Herman, Jr., with violation of Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections 1153
and 1111. Herman was arrested on 08/24/78, at Fort McDowell, Arizona. On
12/19/78, Herman pled guilty in U.S. District Court, Rapid City, South
Dakota, to a superseding information charging him with violation of Title 18,
U.S. Code, Sections 1153 and 1112, Voluntary Manslaughter. On 02/09/79, he
was sentenced to ten years in the custody of the Attorney General.

                              Go to top of page

Randy Hunter



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Kyle by "party or parties unknown."

Investigation still "ongoing."

Finding:

On the evening of 08/25-26/75, Randy Hunter was shot to death in Kyle, South
Dakota. Vern Carlin Top Bear was identified through witnesses as threatening
victim with a rifle and subsequently shooting the rifle which resulted in
Hunter's death. On 10/13/75, Vern Carlin Top Bear was found not guilty by a
jury in United States District Court, Rapid City. The indictment had charged
him with Second Degree Murder in violation of United States Code, Title 18,
Sections 1153 and 1111.

                              Go to top of page

Dennis LeCompte



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:



On 09/07/74, the Pine Ridge, South Dakota, Police Department officers
responded to a fight at the Glenn Three Stars residence, Pine Ridge, South
Dakota. Upon arrival, police found children in living room and Dennis
LeCompte dead in the northwest bedroom. Three Stars admitted shooting Dennis
LeCompte during a struggle after LeCompte stabbed Three Stars' son with a
knife. On 06/23/75 Three Stars was indicted by a Federal Grand Jury, Sioux
Falls, South Dakota. On 10/15/75, his trial commenced in U.S. District Court,
Deadwood, South Dakota. On 10/17/75, Three Stars was acquitted of the charge
Voluntary Manslaughter.

                              Go to top of page

Howard Blue Bird



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 09/04/75, the Pine Ridge, South Dakota Police Department received a
telephone call from an unknown female who reported a fight and stabbing at
the Le Roy Apple residence in Pine Ridge, South Dakota. Pine Ridge Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA) police officers found the victim, Howard Blue Bird,
lying in the kitchen. On 09/05/75, a Federal Grand Jury, Rapid City, South
Dakota returned a true bill charging Le Roy Apple with violation of Title 18,
USC, Sections 1153 and 1112. On 09/10/75, Apple was interviewed and admitted
stabbing Blue Bird. On 10/15/75, Apple appeared in U.S. District Court,
Deadwood, South Dakota, and pled guilty to violation Title 18, U.S. Code,
Section 113(c), Assault with a Deadly Weapon to Commit Bodily Injury. He was
sentenced to one year in the custody of the Attorney General.

                              Go to top of page

Jim Little



Allegation:

AIM supporter stomped to death by GOONs in Oglala.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 09/10/75, James Little was kicked and beaten to death at Oglala, South
Dakota. Tom Chief Eagle, Cecil Bear Robe, Fred Marrowbone and a juvenile were
identified by witnesses as having participated in the beating death of Mr.
Little. The suspects were arrested by Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Officers
on 09/11/75. On 10/20/75, a Federal jury sitting in trial at Rapid City,
South Dakota found subjects Thomas Chief Eagle, Fred Marrowbone and the
juvenile guilty of Voluntary Manslaughter, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section
1112(a). Cecil Bear Robe was acquitted. On 12/05/75, Thomas Chief Eagle was
sentenced to the custody of the U.S. Attorney for a period of six years, the
juvenile was sentenced to the custody of the U.S. Attorney General for a
period of four years pursuant to the Federal Youth Corrections Act and Fred
Marrowbone was sentenced to the custody of the U.S. Attorney General for a
period of six years.

                              Go to top of page

Jackson Washington Cutt



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Parmalee by "unknown individuals."

Investigation still "ongoing."

Finding:

On 9/11/73, Jackson Washington Cutt was found dead in front of a residence in
Parmelee, South Dakota. Information from witnesses indicated the victim was
involved in fight earlier in the morning. An eyewitness observed a suspect
hit the victim over head with hatchet. The suspect was arrested on 12/27/73
in Parmelee, South Dakota by the Rosebud Police Department. On 01/29/75 a
witness was re-interviewed and advised that he did not actually see the
suspect strike the victim with a hatchet. On 01/29/75 the suspect was
re-interviewed. He admitted being near the scene but denied involvement and
denied knowledge of who perpetrated the crime. An Assistant U.S. Attorney,
Sioux Falls, South Dakota, advised that a motion and order to dismiss the
indictment in the above captioned matter was filed on 03/13/75. There was
insufficient evidence to achieve a conviction.

                              Go to top of page

Robert Reddy



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Kyle by gunshot.

No investigation.

Finding:

Robert Reddy was found dead on 12/16/1974, near Kyle, SD, on the Pine Ridge
Reservation. An autopsy revealed Reddy died of two stab wounds through the
heart. Although a suspect was identified, there was insufficient evidence to
charge and convict the suspect.

                              Go to top of page

Melvin Spider



Allegation:

AIM member killed in Porcupine, South Dakota.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 09/22/73, a BIA officer requested FBI assistance with regard to Melvin
Spider, who was found dead on the road between Porcupine and Sharp's Corner
on the Pine Ridge Reservation. Initial investigation suggested Spider was
either a victim of a vehicular hit and run or a severe blow to the head.
Interviews revealed Spider was drunk prior to his death. An autopsy on
09/22/73 revealed Spider died on 09/21/73, of extensive cerebral lacerations
of the brain, which were traumatic in nature, the cause of which was not
obvious. Although a suspect was developed, there was insufficient evidence to
charge that person with the death.

                              Go to top of page

Philip Black Elk



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed when his house exploded.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 06/30/73, the private residence of Phillip Black Elk was completely
destroyed by a propane gas explosion. Investigation determined that the
explosion was caused by a leakage of propane gas within the residence. A
thorough neighborhood investigation was conducted which revealed there had
been a previous problem with propane gas leakage in the neighborhood over the
previous two weeks. Immediately after the explosion, Black Elk advised he
entered the residence and attempted to light the pilot on the hot water
heater when the explosion occurred. Black Elk suffered severe burns and was
immediately taken to the Pine Ridge Community Hospital, where he was listed
in serious condition. Shortly thereafter, Black Elk was flown to Fitzsimmons
General Hospital, Denver, Colorado, where he died. Since the injury was
accidental and caused by actions of the victim, no further criminal
investigation was conducted.

                              Go to top of page

Aloysius Long Soldier



Allegation:

AIM member killed at Kyle, South Dakota, by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 02/09/77, South Dakota DCI advised the FBI of investigation into the death
of Aloysius Long Soldier. He died on 10/07/74. On 02/16/77, a family member
requested a review of the death investigation. The BIA investigative file
into the death was reviewed. It was the conclusion of the BIA that there was
no evidence that the death of Aloysius was anything other than a suicide. The
BIA case was closed. In view of the BIA investigative results, and since the
family member was unable to offer any factual evidence suggesting that the
death was a homicide, no further investigation was conducted.

                              Go to top of page

Phillip Little Crow



Allegation:

AIM supporter beaten to death by GOONs at Pine Ridge.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 11/14/73, on the Pine Ridge Reservation, Irby Leroy Hand killed Phillip
Emery Little Crow by striking him with his fists. Hand signed a confession.
Autopsy results revealed Little Crow died of a skull fracture. On 08/28/74,
Hand was sentenced to five years custody of the Attorney General.

                              Go to top of page

Pedro Bissonette



Allegation:

Oglala Sioux Civil Rights Organization (OSCRO) organizer and AIM supporter
assassinated by BIA Police/GOONs. Body removed from Pine Ridge jurisdiction
prior to autopsy by government contract coroner. No investigation.



Finding:

Pedro Bissonette was killed on a highway four miles north of Pine Ridge. BIA
officers tried to arrest Bissonette on two fugitive warrants, one stemming
from his Wounded Knee activities. When Bissonette advanced on the officers
with a raised 30.06, he was shot. Five hours prior to the time he was shot,
Bissonette had eluded two other BIA police officers. Autopsy results revealed
Bissonette was killed by a single shotgun blast in the chest fired by a
police officer.

                              Go to top of page

Olivia Binals (True Name Olivia Bianas)



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed in Porcupine by "person or persons unknown."

Investigation still "open."

Finding:

On 10/26/75, BIA police contacted the FBI to advise that Olivia Bianas was
found dead at her home. An autopsy revealed Olivia died of a cerebral
hemorrhage caused by a severe beating. Witnesses observed Norman Bianas beat
his wife on the day she died. On 10/27/75, Norman Bianas was arrested. On
11/13/75, he made an admission of his role in the death. On 01/23/76, Bianas
pled not guilty to voluntary manslaughter. He subsequently withdrew the plea
on 03/08/76. On 07/09/76, he was sentenced to eight years custody of the
Attorney General. The U.S. Federal Appeals Court upheld his conviction.

                              Go to top of page

Janice Black Bear



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Manderson by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

Janice Joyce Black Bear died on 10/26/75. An autopsy revealed the cause of
Black Bear's death was cerebral contusions. Contributing death factors were
acute alcoholism and phenobarb/qualude intoxication. A suspect, George
Michael Twiss, admitted to spending the evening with the victim. Twiss
recalled that he woke up at home and had blood on his arms, shirt and pant
leg. Twiss was arrested by the BIA when they arrived at his home and he was
washing his hands. On 07/06/76, Twiss pled guilty to Involuntary
Manslaughter. On 09/03/76, Twiss was sentenced to three years custody of the
Attorney General.

                              Go to top of page

Michelle Tobacco



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by "unknown persons."

No investigation.

Finding:

Michelle Linda Tobacco, age 9 months, died on 10/27/75. A relative of the
victim advised that she consumed liquor, tripped and fell with the baby. When
the relative awoke, Michelle was dead. Autopsy revealed victim died on
10/27/75, of acute pneumonitis and hemorrhage to her adrenal gland. The U.S.
Attorney's Office declined to prosecute the relative.

                              Go to top of page

Delphine Crow Dog



Allegation:

Sister of AIM spiritual leader Leonard Crow Dog. Beaten by BIA police and
left lying in a field. Died from "exposure." No investigation.

Finding:

Delphine (Crow Dog) Eagle Deer died 12/06/72. The cause of death listed on
her death certificate was exposure and sub-zero weather. Other significant
conditions included acute alcoholism. More specifically, the death
certificate indicated that the injury occurred as the result of "accidental
freezing to death," in an open field approximately 2.3 miles southwest of St.
Francis, South Dakota, within the exterior boundaries of the Rosebud
Reservation. An autopsy was conducted and the findings of the autopsy
determined the above-listed causes of death.

                              Go to top of page

Elaine Wagner



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by "person or persons unknown."

No investigation.

Finding:

On 11/30/74, the body of Elaine Wagner was found in a creek bottom in Pine
Ridge, South Dakota. Autopsy showed Wagner died of exposure. Interviews
revealed that at about 4:00 p.m. on 11/29/74, Wagner joined two car loads of
persons and drank with several individuals on the evening of 11/29/74. After
drinking for several hours, Wagner went to a nearby home. At approximately
10:00 p.m. on 11/29/74, Wagner left the house. Her body was found on the
afternoon of 11/30/74 approximately 100 yards from the house. No subject has
been developed and all available investigative leads were exhausted. From all
the evidence, this matter appeared to be a non-felonious death. The U.S.
Attorney advised that there was insufficient evidence to charge any person.

                              Go to top of page

Allison Fast Horse



Allegation:

AIM supporter shot to death near Pine Ridge by "unknown assailants."

No investigation.

Finding:

Allison Fast Horse, aka Allison Little Spotted Horse, Jr. (TN), was found
shot to death on Chadron Road approximately one mile south of Oglala, SD on
the morning of 11/23/73. He had been shot in the chest with a .22 caliber
bullet. An autopsy indicated death was attributed to the bullet wound.
Examination of physical evidence failed to provide any indication as to the
identity of any possible suspects.

                              Go to top of page

John S. Moore



Allegation:

20 year old Penobscot from Maine, AIM supporter stabbed to death in Lincoln,
Nebraska. With stab wounds through the neck and face, and with other cuts and
bruises, death was ruled a "suicide." Eight years later, the "suicide" ruling
was changed, but no further investigation.

Finding:

On 12/02/74 Lincoln, Nebraska, Police Department executed a search warrant
for the barracks housing the Wounded Knee Defense Offense Legal Committee.
The warrant was based on the armed robbery of local residents by four Indian
males. Three individuals, Laurence V. Red Shirt, Garrett E. Wounded Head and
Larry J. Martinez, were arrested in connection with the robbery. John S.
Moore, the fourth suspect in the robbery, was found dead in the barracks. He
was fatally stabbed through the neck and the right side of his face. The
autopsy report indicated death was caused by suicide. This matter was not
investigated by the FBI.

                              Go to top of page

Carl Plenty Arrows Sr.



Allegation:

AIM supporter shot to death near Pine Ridge by "person or persons unknown."

No investigation.

Finding:

At 6:30 p.m. on 12/05/75, Glen Thomas Janis shot Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr. and
Frank Claude LaPointe at Pine Ridge, South Dakota. Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr.
was pronounced dead at the scene. Frank LaPointe subsequently died at Gordon
Hospital, Gordon, Nebraska, on 12/05/75. Janis voluntarily turned himself in
to Pine Ridge authorities on 12/05/75. During an interview with FBI Agents on
12/06/75, Janis admitted shooting Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr. Janis was also
identified by witnesses as the person who shot both victims. On 03/29/76,
Glen Janis pled guilty to second degree murder and voluntary manslaughter
(Title 18, USC, Sections 1153, 1111, and 1112). On 06/15/76, Janis was
sentenced to 20 years on count II and 10 years on count I, sentences to run
concurrently.

                              Go to top of page

Frank La Pointe



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

At 6:30 p.m. on 12/05/75, Glen Thomas Janis shot Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr. and
Frank Claude LaPointe at Pine Ridge, South Dakota. Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr.,
was pronounced dead at the scene. Frank LaPointe subsequently died at Gordon
Hospital, Gordon, Nebraska, on 12/05/75. Janis voluntarily turned himself in
to Pine Ridge authorities on 12/05/75. During an interview with FBI Agents on
12/06/75, Janis admitted shooting Carl Plenty Arrows, Sr. Janis was also
identified by witnesses as having shot both victims. On 03/29/76 Glen Janis
pled guilty to second degree murder and voluntary manslaughter (Title 18,
USC, Sections 1153, 1111, and 1112). On 06/15/76 Janis was sentenced to 20
years on count II and 10 years on count I, sentences to run concurrently.

                              Go to top of page

Floyd S. Binals



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Pine Ridge by GOONs.

No investigation.

Finding:

On 12/25/74 Floyd Sherman Bianas, age16 months, was killed at the residence
of Marion High Bull. High Bull stated he fell with Bianas. No one else was
present. The body of Yvette Lorraine Lone Hill, age 7, was discovered on
12/28/74. Lone Hill had scars and bruises all over her body and had obviously
been beaten. A witness advised he observed Marion High Bull hit Yvette Lone
Hill. On 12/30/74, Marion High Bull was arrested by FBI Agents. Marion Allen
High Bull was tried by a jury and on 10/08/75 High Bull was found guilty of
one count of voluntary manslaughter (Title 18, USC, Section 1112) and one
count of second degree murder (Title 18, USC, Section 1111). On the same date
he was sentenced to 10 years count 1 and 20 years count 2, sentences to run
concurrently.

                              Go to top of page

Yvette Loraine Lone Hill



Allegation:

AIM supporter killed at Kyle by "unknown party or parties."

No investigation.

Finding:

On 12/25/74, Floyd Sherman Bianas, age 16 months, was killed at the residence
of Marion High Bull. High Bull stated he fell with Bianas. No one else was
present. The body of Yvette Lorraine Lone Hill, age 7, was discovered on
12/28/74. Lone Hill had scars and bruises all over her body and had obviously
been beaten. A witness advised he observed Marion High Bull hit Yvette Lone
Hill. On 12/30/74, Marion High Bull was arrested by FBI Agents. Marion Allen
High Bull was tried by a jury and on 10/08/75 High Bull was found guilty of
one count of voluntary manslaughter (Title 18, USC, Section 1112) and one
count of second degree murder (Title 18, USC, Section 1111). On the same date
he was sentenced to 10 years count 1 and 20 years count 2, sentences to run
concurrently.

                              Go to Top of Page
