http://ks.water.usgs.gov/Kansas/pubs/jan.02.html

   USGS

                             MONTHLY HIGHLIGHTS

                                January 2002

  Table of Contents

     * Floods Are Getting Smaller in Some Parts of Kansas
     * USGS Earth Science Information Offices Close
     * Alaska's Vanishing Glaciers
     * This Month in Kansas Water History

             Floods Are Getting Smaller in Some Parts of Kansas

Flood magnitudes are changing for some streams in Kansas, according to a
recent study by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), Department of the
Interior. Records from USGS stream-gaging stations in the western part of the
State showed decreasing trends in flood peaks, and records from stations in
the eastern part of the State showed increasing trends in flood peaks.

Fifteen of 25 streams (60 percent) in the western part of the State showed
decreasing flood magnitudes, while 7 of 29 streams (24 percent) in the
eastern part of the State showed increasing flood magnitudes.

"We are seeing trends in flood peaks for a variety of reasons. The factors
most likely contributing to decreasing flood magnitudes in the western part
of the State are construction of watershed dams and other conservation
practices that reduce runoff to streams, and declines in shallow ground-water
levels," said Teresa Rasmussen, USGS hydrologist. "The increasing flood
magnitudes in the eastern part of the State are probably related to changes
in precipitation patterns."

The information from this study is useful when looking at flood
characteristics of a particular stream. Efficient design of bridges and other
flood-plain structures in part depends on an accurate understanding of flood
characteristics.

Results of the USGS study are printed in, "Trends in Peak Flows of Selected
Streams in Kansas," by Teresa J. Rasmussen and Charles A. Perry. Copies of
Water-Resources Investigations Report 01-4203 are available from the USGS,
Information Services, Box 25286, Federal Center, Denver, CO 80225-0286, or
call 1-888-ASK-USGS. A limited number of copies are available from the USGS
office in Lawrence, Kansas. To view the report visit:

       http://ks.water.usgs.gov/Kansas/pubs/reports/wrir.01-4203.html

   For more information, contact: Teresa Rasmussen, USGS, Lawrence, KS;
   (785) 832-3576; email: rasmuss@usgs.gov.

   Top of Page

USGS Earth Science Information Offices Close

The Washington, D.C., and the Spokane, Washington Earth Science Information
Centers permanently closed December 28. All product stock will transfer to
other USGS sales centers in California, Denver and Reston. USGS products
including maps, posters, professional papers and CD-ROMs will continue to be
available from the Denver distribution facility and state business partners
or may be ordered by calling 1-888-ASK-USGS or on the Web at:

                             http://www.usgs.gov

   For more information, contact: Pat Phillips, Reston, VA; (703)
   648-5931, paphillips@usgs.gov.
   Top of Page

Alaska's Vanishing Glaciers

Fewer than 20 of Alaska's several-thousand valley glaciers, including nearly
700 that are named, are advancing, according to a study the U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS). Significant glacier retreat, thinning, stagnation, or a
combination of these changes characterizes all eleven mountain ranges and
three island areas that presently support glaciers.

"The Earth recently emerged from a global climate event, called the 'Little
Ice Age' during which Alaskan glaciers expanded significantly. The Little Ice
Age began to wane in the late 19th century. In some areas of Alaska, glacier
retreat started during the early 18th century, prior to the beginning of the
industrial revolution," said Bruce Molnia, USGS scientist. "At the peak of
the Little Ice Age, glaciers covered about 10 percent more area in Alaska
than they do today."

A striking example of glacial retreat that started as the Little Ice Age
began to wind down and continues today is found at Glacier Bay, a popular
destination for cruise ships. During the 1790s, when European explorers first
sailed in the vicinity of Glacier Bay, they noted only a small embayment in
the coastline. A large glacier filled much of the basin of Glacier Bay. By
the 1880s, continued glacier retreat resulted in a bay that extended nearly
40 miles. Cruise ships began to regularly navigate the bay, and tourists
could enjoy magnificent tidewater glaciers. Today, Glacier Bay extends more
than 60 miles.

"Ironically, the climate event that made cruising into Glacier Bay not only
possible, but popular, could ultimately take away its top attraction as many
tidewater glaciers now retreat out of the water," Molnia said.

For more information, contact: Diane Noserale, Reston, VA; (703) 648-4333;
email: dnoseral@usgs.gov.
  ________________________________________________________________________

                      Top of Page || Monthly Highlights

                   USGS Water Resources of Kansas Web Site
      Kansas Home Page What's New About Us Kansas Water Data Studies &
             Research Publications Education & Other Info Search

                          National USGS Web Sites
               USGS Water Geology Mapping Biology On-line Help

           U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey
               Comments and suggestions: GS-W-KS_info@usgs.gov
              Privacy Statement || Disclaimer || Accessibility
              Url: http://ks.water.usgs.gov/Kansas/jan.02.html
                       Last modified: January 4, 2002
