http://www.ss.ca.gov/executive/bj_tech_plan.htm

   California Secretary of State Home        Home
                                      Contact Us

                                 CALIFORNIA
                                 eGOVERNMENT
                                    PLAN
     __________________________________________________________________

                      A Statewide Technology Initiative
     __________________________________________________________________

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                 Bill Jones

                               [seal_100.gif]

                                December 1999
     __________________________________________________________________

                              Table of Contents

                                Introduction
                     eGovernment Vision for Californians
             Create a California eGovernment Portal on Internet
     Closing the Digital Divide: Computer Education, Training and Access
           Streamline the Bureaucracy of State Technology Projects
   Reform State Personnel System to Recruit and Retain Highly Qualified IT
                                    Staff
                         Funding Technology Projects
           Resolve Legal Hurdles to Expand California eGovernment
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  INTRODUCTION

Closing the Digital Divide and Creating an eGovernment Framework for California

California is the birthplace of the information age. But our state government
lags far behind in using this technology to deliver a more efficient government
to our citizens. In the development of the Internet and e-commerce, California
industries lead the world but when it comes to state government California goes
from first to worst.

Earlier this year, the plan to implement one single technology application at
the Department of Motor Vehicles was described as the "crowning achievement" of
the current gubernatorial administration. This limited view ignores advances in
the use of technology employed by governments in far-flung places like Spain,
Belgium and Singapore, where leaders are recognizing the power of an information
tool that is projected to host $700 billion in transactions in our global
marketplace by 2002. Focus on individual projects rather than a revision of the
entire technology infrastructure of California will stifle innovation and
prolong state government inefficiency.

As we enter the new century, California must work to eliminate not only the
"Digital Divide" that threatens to leave our inner cities' youth behind, but
also the "Digital Divide" between California government and all other states.
The Executive and Legislative branches must work together to fundamentally
reform our state government technology infrastructure so that taxpayers
ultimately get less government by developing a more efficient government. We
should never ask California taxpayers to expect less efficiency from government
than they demand from the private sector on a daily basis. Accordingly,
eGovernment should be defined as electronic, efficient and easier to use
government for all California citizens. California citizens should be
online--not in line.

At the Secretary of State's Office, we have made great strides toward a more
efficient government through numerous successful technology projects, including:
live Internet display of election results, electronic filing of campaign
disclosure reports, the development of a consolidated electronic statewide voter
file and extensive use of the Internet to deliver information and services to
our constituents. Learning from the success of these projects, I have developed
this plan to move all of California government into the electronic arena.

My plan is an aggressive blueprint to return state government from worst to
first in using eGovernment technology to deliver more efficient services to our
taxpayers. Most importantly, my technology reforms were developed so that we
close the "Digital Divide" and leave no one behind--no child, no adult and no
state employee--through education, training and Internet access for all segments
of society. I welcome your suggestions and comments on this plan--please e-mail
them to me at Bjones@ss.ca.gov.

                                [billsig.gif]

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

                     eGovernment Vision for Californians

   During the course of a year, California businesses and individuals need
   to interact with countless departments in the federal, state and local
   governments. Inevitably, they are trapped in a phone system, confronted
   by an inflexible bureaucrat or forced to spend hours in-line to
   accomplish a menial task.

   If government would simply catch up to the private sector, we could
   provide access to any of the following common transactions
   electronically, rather than in person:
     * Update the address on a drivers license (State)
     * Change the address on car registration (State)
     * Update their voter registration card (Local)
     * Pay tickets, fines and fees (State and Local)
     * Update professional licenses (State)
     * Enroll children in school (Local)
     * Sign up for University or Community College courses (State and
       Local)
     * Pay individual and business income taxes (State and Federal)
     * Transmit sales tax revenue to the Board of Equalization (State)
     * Apply for and receive a business license (Local)
     * Apply for and receive building permits (Local)
     * Provide a forwarding address with the U.S. Post Office (Federal)
     * Apply for and receive state procurement contracts (State)
     * Conduct all state budgeting and financial transactions (State)
     * Complete and transmit payment for state employee expense
       reimbursements (State)

   Federal, state and local government should all work together to provide
   electronic access to all the services that taxpayers need from one
   single Internet location. By expanding 24-hour access to all government
   services, taxpayers can accomplish all their government transactions
   on-line instead of in line.

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

           Create a California eGovernment Portal on the Internet

   Californians should be on-line, not in line. To ensure that
   Californians can access all the Government services they need without
   ever opening a phone book or visiting a brick and mortar state office
   building, one single Internet site should be developed to ensure access
   to all state services needed at any given time.

   Every Californian should be able to visit a single portal on the
   Internet that would provide a list of services needed at various times
   in their life. When an individual moves to or from the state, starts a
   business, pays taxes, buys a car, has a child or suffers the death of a
   family member, a list of all necessary state services should be
   available in an easy-to-find electronic format on the state's Internet
   portal.

   To develop this portal and ensure that resources are committed to
   providing this service, California should enter into a public-private
   partnership to facilitate the implementation of interactive eGovernment
   solutions. The partnership should develop a one-stop, eGovernment
   portal that will allow access to all on-line government services from
   one Internet site.

   Require State Agencies to Develop an eGovernment Plan By Mid-Year 2000
   and be 90 Percent On-line by 2002

   State agencies should immediately conduct an assessment of their
   existing business practices and computer systems. Agencies should
   provide the Governor with a list of all processes they administer that
   provide information and services either directly to the citizens or to
   other state agencies. Agencies should provide a prioritized list of
   applications and programs that can be Internet-enabled to the Governor
   by March 1, 2000. The Governor should require agencies to provide 90
   percent of their services over the Internet by 2002.

   Public-Private Partnerships

   State agencies should maximize the use of low or no-cost public-private
   partnerships to rapidly deploy web-based computer services.

   The Secretary of State's office has successfully tested and implemented
   several new technologies that were provided through public-private
   partnerships. The nation's first and most widely used live Internet
   display of election results and the early stages of Internet campaign
   finance disclosure were all made possible through the assistance and
   cooperation of private sector companies that provided their services to
   the state at little or no cost in exchange for an opportunity to test
   their products and receive well-earned publicity for their company's
   capabilities.

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

     Closing the Digital Divide: Computer Education, Training and Access

   Internet Access Scholarships

   To ensure that all Californians are poised to benefit from the
   educational and commercial potential of the Internet, the state shall
   provide tax incentives to promote universal access to the Internet.
   Internet Service Providers who provide low-cost Internet access to
   subscribers from low-income households shall be provided tax credits
   for the service they provide.

   Internet Service providers who provide Internet access to low-income
   households for $5.00 or less per month should be eligible to receive a
   tax credit from the State of California of $5.00 per subscriber per
   month.

   Computer Access Scholarships

   Companies that provide low-income households with an
   Internet-accessible computer for $10.00 per month or less should be
   eligible to receive a tax credit from the State of California of $10.00
   per subscriber per month.
   Used Computer Clearinghouse

   The State of California should create a non-profit charitable
   clearinghouse for the donation and distribution of Internet-accessible
   used computers from public and private entities to schools and
   low-income households. In-kind donation of computers to the
   clearinghouse should be tax deductible.

   Internet Proficiency Required for Eighth Grade Graduation

   Prior to Eighth Grade Graduation, students in California public schools
   must be taught and be able to demonstrate basic computer literacy and a
   proficiency in the fundamentals of Internet navigation.

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

           Streamline the Bureaucracy of State Technology Projects

   While states like Washington, Pennsylvania and Florida are preparing
   for the e-Economy by performing reverse auctions and building
   e-procurement systems, California government suffers from a lack of
   executive leadership for information technology. With responsibility
   for implementing eGovernment divided between department and agency
   Chief Information Officers (CIO); the State CIO; the Technology
   Investment Review Unit (TIRU) of the Department of Finance; and the
   Director of the Governor's Office of Innovations, it is difficult to
   believe that cohesive leadership can be formed to put California in an
   eGovernment leadership role

   Elevate State CIO to Cabinet Level Position

   The state should elevate the Department of Information Technology
   (DOIT) to a cabinet-level position. The state's Chief Information
   Officer should be involved in major policy discussions and decisions
   and should ensure that state's technology infrastructure is prepared to
   implement those policy changes.
   The state CIO should continually provide the Governor with suggestions
   to improve governmental efficiency through technology. Agency and
   Department CIO's should report to both their Agency Secretary or
   Department Director and the State CIO.

   Streamlining a Stifling Process-Focused Bureaucracy

   With the creation of DOIT by Senate Bill 1 in 1996, the Department of
   Finance Office of Information Technology (OIT) was supposed to be
   eliminated. The Governors Task Force on Government Technology Policy
   and Procurement stated:
   Eliminate the Office of Information Technology: The Office of
       Information Technology does not add significant value in either IT
       advocacy or oversight. State departments and agencies expect OIT to
       provide services that support their IT vision and initiatives and
       add value to the process of IT development and procurement.
       Instead, they are confronted with a process-focused organization
       whose objectives conflict with departmental and project objectives.

   The OIT still exists today (renamed Technology Investment Review Unit),
   and it still does the same work they have done in the past, only now in
   addition to OIT, the agencies and departments must also seek DOIT
   approval for projects. The creation of DOIT without elimination of
   TIRU/OIT has made the project initiation process more bureaucratic and
   process-focused than result-oriented.

   State agencies and departments are challenged with preparing documents
   for bureaucratic organizations--adding significant time to the already
   arduous review process. Instead of focusing on innovation and thought
   leadership, state departments and agencies focus on filling out
   paperwork and getting permission to implement statutory programs. The
   present bureaucratic and redundant approval process is not adding value
   to the departments' and agencies' fulfillment of their missions.

   The Technology Investment Review Unit should be eliminated and its
   substantive work completed during the Department of Information
   Technology review process.

   Streamlining the State Procurement Process

   The procurement process should be revised to allow government purchases
   of technological equipment in a more expedient manner. Technology tools
   should be used to provide instantaneous approval of procurement
   contracts.

   California has made significant efforts to reinvent the IT procurement
   process. Although some progress has been made, the bureaucracies
   created to solve the problem have once again made the problem worse.
   The State Auditor recently stated:
   DGS [Department of General Services] should provide departments with
       sufficient, easy-to-use tools to helpdetermine value. Such tools
       could include improved Internet resources or catalogs organized by
       product that include price. To avoid hindering a departments
       ability to efficiently acquire goods or services, the DGS should
       supply clear and consistent guidance on all state contracting and
       purchasing issues. The DGS should also provide a complete list and
       accessible list of master service agreements to departments to
       enable them to take advantage of the States collective buying power
       by using such agreements more often and more effectively.

   Ironically, the use of a new procurement processes--CMAS and
   MSA--largely for technology purchases are suffering not because the
   process is misguided, but because the very technology tools that can
   cure the short-comings identified by the Auditor have not been
   appropriately applied to the procurement processes themselves.

   And, notwithstanding the fact that the creation of the CMAS and MSA
   have helped to speed the procurement process, they have not addressed
   the large complex IT failures that California is unfortunately now so
   famous for delivering.

   The state needs to reform the procurement process for large complex IT
   projects so that risk and success is shared with the private sector.
   The best practices of the private sector, along with the successes in
   other states, should form the basis for a reform of California IT
   procurement.

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

   Reform State Personnel System to Recruit and Retain Highly Qualified IT
                                    Staff

   The rapid turnover and shortage of qualified Information Technology
   professionals in State Government is a growing problem that threatens
   the state's ability to implement complex eGovernment solutions. The
   high salaries and opportunities available in the private sector are
   driving numerous skilled employees out of state service at an alarming
   rate.

   The state should significantly revise the pay and classification
   structure for Information Technology professionals. Qualification
   standards should be updated to reflect current technologies and
   compensation levels should be elevated to be competitive with industry.
   To be a true partner with the private sector in technology ventures, to
   bridge the gap between service providers and program managers, and to
   manage day-to-day functions critical to program delivery, the state
   will need a pool of skilled, qualified employees.

   Exemptions to civil service hiring procedures should be granted to
   qualified IT recruits who agree to remain in state service for at least
   four years.

   Create Opportunity Scholarships to Recruit State IT Staff

   The State of California should provide scholarships or low cost student
   loans through the University of California, California State University
   and California Community Colleges to promising computer science majors
   who commit to working in state service for at least four years after
   graduation.

   Efficiency Bonuses for State IT Staff and Project Managers

   A portion of the cost savings that result from efficiency created
   through the implementation of technology projects shall be used to
   provide bonuses of up to ten percent per year for the Information
   Technology project manager and staff who developed the cost saving
   application. The bonuses may be received each year the savings are
   realized, provided that the employee continues to work for the same
   state department.

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

                         Funding Technology Projects

   eGovernment Fund

   The Legislature should create an eGovernment implementation fund and
   provide seed capital of $100,000,000 to provide a source of funds for
   agencies and departments to rapidly develop Internet-accessible
   services.

   Reinvesting the Efficiency Dividend

   The cost savings derived from efficiencies created by new technology
   projects shall be placed in a reinvestment fund established by each
   agency. The funds shall be dispersed in three equal parts: (1)
   Reinvestment in Technology (including employee bonuses), (2) Technology
   Education Fund, and (3) Tax/Fee Reductions and Rebates.

                             [dividend_400.gif]

                          Back to Table of Contents
     __________________________________________________________________

           Resolve Legal Hurdles to Expand California eGovernment

   California Digital Identification Act

   Under current practices, the reliability of a digital signature is only
   as strong as the verification of the identification that was conducted
   before the digital signature certificate was issued to the signer of
   the document. In the paper arena, an individual only possesses one
   version of his or her own signature, but it is possible for one
   individual to control multiple different signature key pairs used to
   create digital signatures on electronic documents.

   Many government transactions require clear proof of identity--proof
   that is not provided by existing digital signatures. To tie existing
   digital signatures to identification, this legislation would require
   the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to work with Certification
   Authorities to provide one and only one digital signature key pair to
   any Californian who requests one and provides proof of identification
   to the DMV. Identification must be checked in-person by DMV staff prior
   to the issuance of a digital identification.

   Upon passage of this legislation, DMV-issued digital identification
   will be deemed sufficient proof of identification for all electronic
   transactions with public entities that would otherwise require proof of
   identification.

   California Electronic Privacy Act

   Before accessing information or conducting transactions on state
   government web sites, Internet users should be informed what, if any,
   additional information is being collected and for what purposes that
   data will be used.

   Information collected by government agencies on individual Internet
   users shall only be publicly disclosed in the aggregate form. Specific
   information on individual visitors to government web sites shall not be
   collected or maintained without the unambiguous consent of the web site
   visitor.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Copyright ©2000 California Secretary of State. Privacy Statement

     [spacer.gif]
