http://www.accessnoaa.noaa.gov

   Second part of the top banner with pictures of an airplane, the NOAA
   seal and florida outline. Banner with various pictures of NOAA related
   items with Access NOAA across the graphic.


                                Jan 10, 2002

               an online newsletter for and by NOAA employees


                               SEARCH_________
                                     GO
                              Main Page Button
                              On Camera button
                              Happenings Button
                         "SFA Countdown continues --
                                less than ten
                          days til administration"
                              [surveylogo.jpg]
                               Just Ask Button
                             Popular Hits Button
                            Suggestion Box Button
                             Past Issue Archive
                       Gallery of Award Winners Button
                              Logo Items Button


                            Team Member of Month
                       Cited for Tsunami Center Design
                        Picture of William Singleton

   Despite the unlikely title of Indefinite Delivery Order Contractor,
   William Singleton has delivered a superior product that, as he puts it,
   speaks to the environment in Palmer, Alaska.
   Under contract to the NOAA/Central Administrative Support Center via
   Burns & McDonnell Engineering, Bill captured NOAAs January Team Member
   of the Month award for his work as project leader in designing a 6,700
   sq. ft. West Coast/Alaska Tsunami Warning Center for the National
   Weather Service. NOAA staff calls his final design product seamless.
   The Air Force thinks highly of Bill's work too. As an Air Force
   Reservist, LTC Singleton is about to become a Colonel.

                              -- FULL STORY --

                                 [bdot.jpg]

                              Employee of Month
                          Tracks Path of Pollution
                           Picture of James Jordan

   Ask James Jordan what he does and he says hes an electronics engineer.
   Ask his colleagues at NOAA Research what he does and they Jims
   exceptional level of commitment has advanced new observational
   technology and anticipated new observational needs which directly
   affect the prediction of weather, climate and air quality.
   Jims engineering leadership and technological innovation have earned
   him the years first Employee of the Month award. At NOAA Researchs
   Environmental Technology Laboratory in Boulder, Jim is described as
   finding simple but elegant solutions to engineering problems.
   To collect initial data demonstrating the value of one innovation, he
   collaborated with Scripps Institute of Oceanography to deploy a
   wind-profiler prototype on a buoy anchored off Southern Californias
   coast.
   As new instruments are designed and deployed to remote, inaccessible
   areas, Jims benchmark simplicity will be key to reliable yet ongoing
   and unattended operation.

                              -- FULL STORY --

    On U.S Senate floor, Senator Fritz Hollings of South Carolina called
   work of NOAA Fisheries special agent Eugene Proulx "the gold standard."
                            -- See Happenings --

                         [macfarland.jpg]

Photo courtesy of UN

   NOAA Corps' Captain MacFarland Addresses UN General Assembly
      Links Better Maritime Information to Safety and Economy

As the National Hydrographer, NOAA Corps Captain David MacFarland
addressed the United National General Assembly last month, thanking
that body for granting "observer status" to the International
Hydrographic Organization. Speaking on behalf of the organization,
an intergovernmental group dedicated to supporting safe navigation
and protecting the marine environment, Captain MacFarland said that
granting observer status at the UN will allow the International
Hydrographic Organization to significantly boost discussion about
safe navigation and cooperative effort among all UN member states.
"It was incredibly exciting to speak at the UN," he said. "Perhaps
the most exciting part was that as I was returning to my seat after
delivering my remarks I turned around to see that I was being
followed by maybe 12 ambassadors and delegates -- all eager to know
more about joining the International Hydrographic Organization. They
could see the value, the lifesaving aspects and economic potential,
of nautical charts. They could see the tie between better maritime
information and a more prosperous and sustainable economy."
Captain MacFarland heads the National Ocean Services Office of Coast
Survey, filling the traditional position of National Hydrographer,
the U.S. delegate to the International Hydrographic Organization.
The Office of Coast Survey is responsible for the nautical charting
and mapping of Americas waters, from certain inland waters and
rivers to ports and the deep oceans. In line with promoting safe
navigation, the office is charged with safeguarding life, property
and the environment in tandem with bolstering economic growth.

                         -- FULL STORY --

Group picture featuring Camp Springs staff, Al Roker and Willard Scott.
                    Today Show visits Camp Springs!
          NBC's Al Roker and Willard Scott join NOAA's team.
                          -- See ON CAMERA --
                                   __________________________________________________________________

                            Weather Team All Set
                     For First-Ever Olympics Partnership
                              By Marilu Trainor
            NOAA National Weather Service Public Affairs Officer


                                Group of meteorologists view mountain.

Gearing up for Salt Lake 2002 Olympic Winter Games, NWS forecasters eye
           potential avalanche slide areas in Provo Canyon.
  __________________________________________________________________

     More than one million spectators, thousands of athletes, officials
     and local residents will converge on Utahs Wasatch Front mountains
     and the greater Salt Lake City area for 2002 Winter Olympics events
     in February. Keeping the population aware of rapidly changing
     weather conditions is a challenge that falls to a team of weather
     forecasters from the National Weather Service, the private sector
     and academic community.
     Weather typically affects the Olympic Winter Games in some way,
     whether it is snow, fog, wind, air quality, warm temperature, rain,
     or avalanches, said Vickie Nadolski, director, NOAAs National
     Weather Service Western Region, headquartered in Salt Lake City.
     Vickie and her team of meteorologists are getting ready to support
     the XIX Olympic Winter Games from February 8 - 24 and the VII
     Paralympic Winter Games, March 7 - 16 in her home state.

                              -- FULL STORY --
                                      __________________________________________________________________


     Your Voice Counts! Vice Admiral Lautenbacher welcomes your
     suggestions and questions. As frequently as possible, he'll respond
     to questions of broad interest in AccessNOAA. Please send yours via
     Just Ask on left column.

                                  [cfc.jpg]
                            NOAA CFC TOPS GOAL!!


Picture of a fish in a jar.
          Can you
      identify this?



   Contact Info | Privacy Statement | Disclaimer
   Publication of the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration
   (NOAA),
   U.S Dept. of Commerce
   Date Last Updated: 01/10/02
